---
title: Today's Date is 1.1.1.1
date: 2018-04-01 15:48:50
tags:
- Internet
- DNS
- Launch
---
# Today's Date is 1.1.1.1
April 1st is known ubiquitously as the day for playing jokes and spreading hoaxes. Naturally, today was the perfect choice for me to drop my first blog post. Unfortunately, I do not have any elaborate hoaxes to entrap you with, but I am quite certain that you will at least chuckle at my jokes, that is if you have not blocked my website within the next ten minutes.

However, to dissolve some of your skepticism (and to give me some comfort over choosing such an untimely morning to be inspired), I'd like to point out that I'm not alone in choosing April 1st as the first stepping stone in my quest to greatness

Of course, corporations have always leveraged national holidays to market to consumers. Many companies like to play practical jokes on April 1st, but here are some notable examples of serious launches that you are probably familiar with:
* **Apple** was founded today in 1976 by Steve Jobs, Steve Wozniak, and Ronald Wayne. If it was a joke then I have much hope for this blog.
* **Gmail** (by Google) launched in 2004, crushing Hotmail and Yahoo, both of which "only" offered ~25MB of storage to their users. Dwarfing their competition, Gmail launched with 1GB of storage and blazing-fast email search. All For free. It was so revolutionary that the media believed that [the launch](http://googlepress.blogspot.com/2004/04/google-gets-message-launches-gmail.html) was a [hoax](https://www.cnet.com/news/googles-web-mail-no-joke/).
* **Amazon Dash** was peculiar in just the right way, which again lead many to believe that the product was a [practical joke](https://mashable.com/2015/03/31/amazon-dash-button/#iAJVkOTnFgqV).

Now Cloudflare seeks to join this list with the launch of **1.1.1.1**, "the Internet's fastest, privacy-first consumer DNS service." I was fairly convinced that the service was a practical joke until I tried it myself.

But what does a "privacy-first consumer DNS service" even mean? First, let's define DNS (Domain Name System) and look at how it fits into the Internet.

## DNS: A Rough Overview
DNS stands for Domain Name System. As the name implies, DNS revolves around Domain Names, which are human readable words joined together by dots: `google.com`. These domains are aliases for the addresses of servers, which could look like some variation of: `2001:0db8:85a3:0000:0000:8a2e:0370:7334`.

> Note: this is a IPv6 address. Doesn't look as friendly as `google.com`, does it? That's why the DNS exists, it serves as a sort of digital phonebook which maps human readable addressed to server addresses so your browser knows where to fetch the content that is `google.com`.  

Here are some other resources on How DNS works:
* [How DNS Works, an animated comic](https://howdns.works/ep1/)
* [/u/azz_kikkr's explanation on Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/explainlikeimfive/comments/2jv11s/eli5how_do_dns_servers_work/)

Why would anyone want to use 1.1.1.1? Why does your DNS matter?

## The Benefits of 1.1.1.1
Generally, most people do not explicitly set their DNS Network. As such, the DNS that they use is determined by the network they are connected to, which is determined by the network's Internet Service Provider (ISP).

Essentially, all Internet traffic on your computer gets routed through the DNS. Without some assurance of security, you're putting your entire Internet history through a third-party's service, whether you like it or not. Your ISP can access this list, putting your privacy at risk. In the United States the Senate recently removed the restriction preventing ISPs from selling their user's data.

> Speculation: Considering the likes of Net Neutrality, ISP's could leverage your DNS to decide which sites to slow down to get you to drop more $$$  

[Governments](https://www.theverge.com/2014/3/21/5532522/turkey-twitter-ban-google-dns-workaround) have tried to also take advantage of centralized Domain Name Systems to oppress their people. To circumvent privacy issues like these Cloudflare has developed a system that routes your traffic over a more secure pipeline than those used by most Domain Name Systems.

### Will it Work?
Clearly, Cloudflare's release was timely. Not only was the date a great choice (1.1.1.1 is a succession of four 1s, that is "4 1", or 4/1 - April 1st), but as is well timed with consumers questing the power of private corporations hoarding, farming, and selling their data with no say in the scenario.

A system like this is very easy to switch to, and those who need it most is will recognize its significance.

## To Switch, or not to Switch?
I wanted to see for myself if it was worth switching to 1.1.1.1, so I decided to try a simple ping test of both Cloudflare's `1.1.1.1` and Google's `8.8.8.8`. I will say that it is much easier to type `1.1.1.1`.

```bash
$ ping 1.1.1.1
PING 1.1.1.1 (1.1.1.1): 56 data bytes
64 bytes from 1.1.1.1: icmp_seq=38 ttl=55 time=7.007 ms
64 bytes from 1.1.1.1: icmp_seq=39 ttl=55 time=7.440 ms
64 bytes from 1.1.1.1: icmp_seq=40 ttl=55 time=8.521 ms
64 bytes from 1.1.1.1: icmp_seq=41 ttl=55 time=6.973 ms
64 bytes from 1.1.1.1: icmp_seq=42 ttl=55 time=6.693 ms
64 bytes from 1.1.1.1: icmp_seq=43 ttl=55 time=6.985 ms
64 bytes from 1.1.1.1: icmp_seq=44 ttl=55 time=6.773 ms
64 bytes from 1.1.1.1: icmp_seq=45 ttl=55 time=7.394 ms
64 bytes from 1.1.1.1: icmp_seq=46 ttl=55 time=6.496 ms
64 bytes from 1.1.1.1: icmp_seq=47 ttl=55 time=6.623 ms

$ ping 8.8.8.8
PING 8.8.8.8 (8.8.8.8): 56 data bytes
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=28 ttl=58 time=7.928 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=29 ttl=58 time=11.109 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=30 ttl=58 time=6.794 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=31 ttl=58 time=10.063 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=32 ttl=58 time=8.227 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=33 ttl=58 time=7.488 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=34 ttl=58 time=7.473 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=35 ttl=58 time=7.380 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=36 ttl=58 time=103.481 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=37 ttl=58 time=7.053 ms
64 bytes from 8.8.8.8: icmp_seq=38 ttl=58 time=44.237 ms
```

I let both tests run for approx. 2 minutes and visually compared the output. `1.1.1.1` was generally quicker than `8.8.8.8`.

> Note: Accidentally missed-typed and pinged `1.1` instead of `1.1.1.1` initially and was surprised to find that it remapped to `1.0.0.1`, which is Cloudflare's backup address.

I support projects that are working towards remodeling the current convections of Internet privacy and security. The Internet is a country of its own, one that is not governed by the borders of our world. The rules of operation are different than that of the centralized world that we live in.  

Ultimately, Cloudflare provides a fast service - I'll be using 1.1.1.1 going forward.

## Further Reading
* [1.1.1.1 Landing Page](https://1.1.1.1/)
* [Cloudflare: Announcing 1.1.1.1](https://blog.cloudflare.com/announcing-1111/)
* [Cloudflare: Technical Implementation of 1.1.1.1](https://blog.cloudflare.com/dns-resolver-1-1-1-1/)
