- - - -
title: The Simple Blockchain
date: 2018-04-03 17:15:19
tags:
* Simple
- - - -
# The Simple Blockchain
For the past few months I have iterated on an educational blockchain implementation that can be used as a starting point for understanding the concept of a blockchain. The most recent iteration was a barebones cryptocurrency built in Python that was insecure, but provided an educational implementation of:

- Encryption
- Transactions
- Blocks
- Proof of Work
- Distributed Consensus 

I am revisiting the concept after diving deeper into blockchain development and have decided to reimplement the project on the Ethereum blockchain as an introduction to writing smart contracts and interacting with them off-chain. This iteration is intended to be an augmented version of the initial cryptocurrency I had built.

## Constraints
Since this project is meant to be an introduction to blockchain development I decided that it would be ideal to reimplement a high-level version of Bitcoin as its concepts and protocols can be grasped without too much in-depth exploration.

I wanted Simple to be easy to follow. Solidity is a powerful and complete language, but it is optimized for writability. This is not optimal for my blockchain as the goal of the blockchain is to have easy to understand internals. As such, my logical choice would be to implement the cryptocurrency in Vyper, Ethereum’s experimental language for writing smart contracts. Vyper’s syntax is modeled after Python, in fact, all Vyper syntax is valid Python syntax. This will make the smart contracts readable and easy for self-learners to replicate. I’ll take this further once the entire blockchain has been built by creating a beginner friendly tutorial that covers how to implement Simple.

I want to demo Simple at Demo Night, a yearly event for Make School students (like myself) to demonstrate their skillset by demoing their projects to the public. I thought it would be cool to allow visitors of my booth to buy candy through Simple. This meant that people I have never met need to interact with the cryptocurrency. I’ll do this by building a SMS client in Python that uses Web3.py to interact with my cryptocurrency on the Ethereum blockchain. This will allow people to send and receive simple tokens via SMS. For the sake of testing I’ll create a CLI to interact with the token as well.

For the sake of simplicity I decided to implement local, off-chain storage on the clients themselves. Not all of Simple’s cryptocurrency data needs to be stored on the blockchain, only the transactional data and the accompanying elements that need to be verified. I decided to deploy Simple publicly, but my goal was to have it function on a testing network, then a private network. After verifying that it is secure enough to be deployed on the Ethereum network, it will be deployed to the blockchain.

### Recap
- Simple Blockchain (Vyper)
	- Modeled after Bitcoin
	- Deployed on testing network -> private network -> Ethereum blockchain
	- Off-chain data storage
- Client (Python, Web3.py, Twilio, Postgres, Redis)
	- Create accounts and keep track of user data
	- Basic interactions via CLI
	- Send and receive money via SMS

## Roadmap
Here are the iterative steps for building the cryptocurrency:

1. Build the Simple blockchain 
2. Interact with and make use of the Simple blockchain
3. Host the Simple node on a private network
4. Deploy to the Ethereum blockchain

## Resources
**Cryptocurrency Design**
- [Minimum Viable Block Chain - igvita.com](https://www.igvita.com/2014/05/05/minimum-viable-block-chain/)
- [Dumbcoin](https://github.com/julienr/ipynb_playground/blob/master/bitcoin/dumbcoin/dumbcoin.ipynb)

**Solidity**
- [Introduction to Smart Contracts — Solidity 0.4.21 documentation](http://solidity.readthedocs.io/en/v0.4.21/introduction-to-smart-contracts.html)
- [Create Mineable ERC20 Tokens](https://lightrains.com/blogs/how-to-create-mineable-erc20-tokens)
- [Create a cryptocurrency contract in Ethereum](https://ethereum.org/token)

**Vyper**
- [Installing Vyper — Vyper  documentation](https://vyper.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installing-vyper.html)

**Web.py**
- [Quickstart — Web3.py 4.0.0 documentation](http://web3py.readthedocs.io/en/stable/quickstart.html)
